---
layout: post
title: Upgrading OpenWRT
date: 2022-03-04
tags: system
---

At the time when I bought my Linksys WiFi routers, OpenWRT was in the version
19.x and now we have version 21.x. I replaced DD-WRT to OpenWRT in the past and
I would not expect the DD-WRT config can be port to OpenWRT. But for upgrading
the versions of OpenWRT, however, it is natural to expect the config can be
ported. Except it is not seamless in my case.

It has been
[reported](https://www.reddit.com/r/openwrt/comments/qmeb17/trying_to_update_from_openwrt_19078_to_21021_on/)
that upgrading OpenWRT to 21.x is not trivial. The reason probably lies in the
use of [DSA](https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-user/network/dsa/dsa-mini-tutorial)
that changed the philosophy in handling switch interface in the kernel. While
in OpenWRT, there is a `sysupgrade` command that allows us to flash the
firmware *without* retaining the config, i.e.,

    sysupgrade -n <image>

But it won't work for the 19.x to 21.x upgrade on any of my Linksys WRT
devices. It gives out the reason as "Image version mismatch: image 1.1, device
1.0". That is not an issue of the config retained or not. Simply the image's
version triggered the safety logic of `sysupgrade`.

However, it would work if we use the `-F` (force) option. But we need the
"factory" image, i.e., the one with extension `.img` and for flashing OpenWRT
from the factory firmware. For example, the WRT3200ACM device, we can first,
scp the image to the device (e.g., put it in `/tmp` as it is a tmpfs large
enough to host a few MB), and then, run the following command:

    sysupgrade -F -n openwrt-21.02.2-mvebu-cortexa9-linksys_wrt3200acm-squashfs-factory.img

This will flash the firmware and reset the machine. And after that, the device
will return to the default config, i.e., no WiFi turned on and LAN IP set to
192.168.1.1. (This is also the method to flash the factory firmware on OpenWRT)

In OpenWRT, the config files are mostly in `/etc/config` (`/etc/ethers` and
`/etc/hosts` may the the only exceptions for user contents). Therefore those
unrelated to network (e.g., dropbear, or anything except `/etc/config/network`)
should be able to copy over if you got the backup.

How's OpenWRT 21.x?

One noticable caveat: Some older iOS device are not supporting WPA3. Hence we
have to fall back to use WPA2 even OpenWRT supports it.
